---
layout: ../components/layouts/page.astro
title: About Me
---

# Nathan Jones

## About Me

I am a full stack developer, a software architect, and a leader of software
engineers. I love designing and building software systems and I'm passionate
about nurturing teams, processes and culture to do the same.

Since 2006 I have held professional roles where I was responsible for
delivering enterprise software across many industries including healthcare,
dairy, tourism, advertising, recruitment, insurance, logistics, and payments.

I have worked with a wide variety of technologies in my professional capacity
including: back-end systems with JVM, Python and node.js; relational and Nosql
DBs (including a stint as a a Mongo DBA); infrastructure across multiple cloud
providers; used a wide variety of browser-based JavaScript and CSS frameworks;
and worked with a varienty of CI/CD and test automation tools.

In 1996, as a 12 year old, I discovered the thrill of creating something from
nothing using GOTO statements with MS Basic on my dad's Pentium 100. I'm
grateful that decades later I'm able to continue to experience this joy and
share it with others.


## About This Blog

Most of the work building an enterprise software product is within the realm of
either back-end APIs or front-end user interfaces and collectively this is
often referred to as "full stack". To me "full stack" is more than this; it
indicates the ability to deliver a working product as the sole member of a
technology team.

Besides merely back-end and front-end application development, "full stack"
also requires some technical ability relating to other dimensions such as
infrastructure, databases, networking, and deployment tooling. These other
dimensions, along with the processes we use to manage them, can be collectively
described as the "glue".

In this blog I intend to share my thoughts about effective patterns for
building, running and maintaining enterprise software with a focus on the
"glue" that makes us more effective "full stack" engineers.


## Contact Me

You can reach me on [LinkedIn][] or via @_ncjones on [Twitter][].


[LinkedIn]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nathan-c-jones/
[Twitter]: https://twitter.com/_ncjones
