---
title: Reflections on COVID-19 Policies and Public Trust in New Zealand
date: 2025-04-26
author: Nathan
desc: |
  My submission to the New Zealand Royal Commission on COVID-19 Lessons
  Learned.
img: /img/tongariro-into-the-mist.webp
---

During the COVID-19 pandemic, I, like many New Zealanders, tried to make the
best decisions I could for my family based on the information available at the
time. Since then, I have reflected on my experiences — both positive and
negative — and how the public health response affected my trust in
institutions. I originally submitted the following account to the Royal
Commission on COVID-19 Lessons Learned. I am sharing it here to contribute to
open discussion about how we can respond better in the future.

## About Me

I am a principal software engineer, a parent, and a keen endurance sports
enthusiast. During the COVID-19 pandemic, my family and I lived through the
Auckland and Waikato lockdowns. I received three doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech
vaccine between late 2021 and early 2022. Throughout 2020, I was training for a
major triathlon event while helping to build a fully remote engineering team at
a fintech startup.


## My Experience

With the exception of swimming pool closures, the lockdowns did not have a
major impact on my day-to-day life. Prior to the pandemic, I was already
working from home, completing most of my cycling sessions indoors, and running
locally.

I had surgery to remove orthopedic hardware from my elbow postponed twice
during 2020 due to pandemic response policies. On one occasion, the surgery was
cancelled on the day it was scheduled, after I had already arrived at the
hospital. Because I had experienced cold-like symptoms two weeks earlier, and
no rapid antigen tests were available at the time, hospital policy required a
negative COVID test several days prior. I had not been informed of this
requirement. Being turned away from surgery at the last minute was frustrating
and, in my view, a waste of hospital resources.

When the COVID vaccine became available, I was cautious. I understood it was
based on new technology, and I wanted to see more evidence of safety before
proceeding. After about six months, seeing no widespread reports of adverse
effects and facing mounting pressure from vaccine mandates, I reluctantly
decided to proceed.

I was also skeptical about the stated benefits of the COVID vaccine. We were
told it would reduce transmission rates and reduce symptom severity, but both
claims seemed questionable. If the vaccine did not prevent infection, how could
it reliably reduce spread? And given that it was based on the original Wuhan
strain, how effective would it be against new variants like Omicron? I searched
for information but found little satisfactory evidence.

After receiving my first dose, I experienced recurring earaches and developed
tinnitus in my right ear, particularly after swimming. The tinnitus worsened to
the point that I consulted an ENT specialist. An MRI ruled out tumors, but no
specific cause was found. I eventually gave up swimming, and the intense bouts
of ringing subsided, but a constant background whine in my right ear remains.

In early 2022, my youngest child began school. Throughout the year, all adults
on school grounds were required to wear masks, making it difficult to build
relationships with teachers and other parents.

Although my partner and I had taken the vaccine, we initially delayed
vaccinating our children. We understood that children were at low risk for
severe COVID outcomes and still had concerns about vaccine safety. However, by
early 2022, our children’s schools began warning that unvaccinated students
could be excluded from school activities. Under pressure, we reluctantly had
our children vaccinated.

Shortly after, our entire family tested positive for COVID. After that
experience, we decided not to continue with further boosters, nor were they
required by our schools. We remained cautious by staying home whenever symptoms
appeared.

Our eldest child missed multiple years of school camps due to pandemic
disruptions and was only able to attend her first school camp in secondary
school.

Since late 2024, after a severe flu-like illness, I have experienced lingering
minor health issues, including lower perceived energy levels and frequent nasal
congestion.


## Reflection

At the time I received the COVID vaccine, I knew it used new mRNA technology
but assumed it operated similarly to traditional vaccines. I trusted that
decades of vaccine safety history would apply.

Since then, I have learned that mRNA vaccination technology is significantly
different. Traditional vaccines deliver antigens directly; mRNA vaccines rely
on transfection to instruct the body's own cells to produce antigens
internally. During the pandemic, regulatory bodies broadened the definition of
"vaccine" to encompass this new platform. Before this reclassification, mRNA
delivery techniques were often categorized as gene therapy by agencies like the
FDA and EMA.

This significant technological shift was not made clear to the public. Without
being made aware of this reclassification, many New Zealanders — myself
included — were unable to give fully informed consent. Looking back, I regret
taking the vaccine. Had I known I was being asked to accept a new
transfection-based technology previously classified as gene therapy, I would
have made a different decision. I believe many New Zealanders, given our
country's traditional stance on genetic engineering, would have had serious
reservations if they had been properly informed.

I cannot say definitively whether the vaccine caused my tinnitus or other
ongoing health complaints, nor can I say whether these were caused by COVID
infection itself. However, the lack of clear answers remains frustrating.
Because New Zealand had such high vaccine uptake, there may now be too few
unvaccinated individuals from whom to draw meaningful health outcome
comparisons.

The lack of transparency about the nature of mRNA technology, combined with
overconfidence in statements about vaccine effectiveness, left me feeling
manipulated. This experience has significantly eroded my trust in both the New
Zealand government and mainstream media.

In my view, the early pandemic response — focusing on slowing the spread
through distancing and contact tracing — was appropriate. However, by 2022,
with the emergence of Omicron, policies like mask mandates and vaccine mandates
in schools and workplaces were excessive and likely ineffective.


## Recommendations

1. **End Coercion in Public Health Policies**

    Public health initiatives should be based on education and voluntary
    participation, not mandates enforced by employers or institutions.

2. **Promote Informed Consent for New Health Technologies**

    New technologies should be introduced with full transparency, allowing
    individuals to make decisions based on complete information. Public
    relations efforts that obscure or reframe material facts are unacceptable.

3. **Ensure Public Health Policies Are Evidence-Based**

    Health policies must be backed by demonstrable evidence. When evidence is
    lacking, policies should be implemented in ways that allow real-world
    evaluation, rather than relying on assumptions or models alone.


## Closing Statement

I offer these reflections in the hope that future public health responses will
be built on greater transparency, respect for individual choice, and a stronger
commitment to evidence. Trust, once lost, is difficult to rebuild — but with
humility and open dialogue, it is possible.
